-THIS JOURNEY THAT WE ALL TAKE
FROM THE CRADLE TO THE GRAVE
SEEMS TO BE A QUEST
WHERE WE'RE ALL SEEKING ANSWERS
TO THREE SPECIFIC, FUNDAMENTAL
QUESTIONS TO OUR LIVES.
THEY'RE TIMELESS.
"WHO AM I?"
"WHY AM I HERE?"
AND "WHAT AM I SUPPOSED TO DO?"
NOW, THE GREATEST SCIENTIFIC
ADVANCEMENTS OUT THERE,
AT LEAST IN THE PUBLIC ARENA,
SEEM TO HAVE
A REDUCTIONIST APPROACH,
WHERE THEY BREAK EVERYTHING DOWN
INTO ITS BASE INGREDIENT,
UNDERSTAND THE INGREDIENTS,
AND PUT IT BACK TOGETHER
TO TRY AND UNDERSTAND THE WHOLE.
BUT THAT DOESN'T ANSWER
THE QUESTION AS TO WHY.
NOW, THE GREATEST RELIGIONS
OUT THERE --
AT LEAST THE FAMOUS,
NOT-SO-FAMOUS,
AND THE INFAMOUS --
ALL SEEM TO CLAIM THAT THEY HAVE
THE ANSWERS, AS WELL.
BUT THESE ARE ENCRYPTED
INTO ALLEGORY --
SYMBOLIC, ARCANE WISDOM
PUT INTO SCRIPTS.
BUT ALBERT EINSTEIN SAYS
THAT IF YOU CANNOT EXPLAIN
SIMPLY TO SOMEBODY ANY SUBJECT,
THEN YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND
THAT SUBJECT.
AND THAT MAY OR MAY NOT BE TRUE.
BUT MAYBE IT'S NOT THE FAILING
OF SCIENCE
OR THE FAILING OF RELIGION
THAT HAS KEPT US
FROM HAVING OUR OWN SALVATION.
MAYBE IT'S THE FACT
THAT WE ARE WAITING
FOR THESE THINGS TO DELIVER US
WHEN ALL THEY'RE DOING
IS ACTING AS A SIGNPOST
SAYING "IT'S THIS WAY.
FOLLOW US. USE US AS A TOOL."
AND THAT IS A TYPICAL THING
THAT WE SEE MOST OF THE TIME,
WHERE WE ARE WAITING FOR
OUR PARENTAL FIGURE TO SAVE US.
SO, HERE WE ARE AT BURNING MAN,
AMONG AN ART COMMUNITY.
AND THE ONE THING THAT'S
DIFFERENT WITH ART COMMUNITIES
IS, AMONG THE GREATEST ARTISTS,
WHICH THERE ARE A LOT OF HERE,
YOU DO NOT NECESSARILY HEAR THEM
SAY THAT THEY WANT TO SAVE YOU
OR DELIVER YOU FROM SOMETHING
OR TO SOMETHING,
BECAUSE IN THE PRESENCE
OF THE GREATEST ARTISTS,
YOU DO NOT WANT TO BE LIKE THEM
NOR ANYBODY ELSE,
NOR ANY TIME ELSE,
OR ANY WHERE ELSE.
YOU WANT TO BE EXACTLY WHO
AND WHAT YOU ALREADY ARE.
WELCOME TO THE SHOW.
WE ARE "WAKING INFINITY."
WHAT IS ART?
HOW DOES ONE CATEGORIZE IT
AMONG THE HUMAN EXPERIENCE?
IS IT SOMETHING WE DO
JUST FOR FUN?
OR DOES IT PLAY A VITAL ROLE
IN OUR SPECIES?
THERE IS NOT A CIVILIZATION
IN HISTORY
THAT DID NOT HAVE
SOME FORM OF ART.
SO IS THERE A BUILT-IN ROLE
THAT IT PLAYS WITHIN HUMANITY?
WHAT IF ART,
THE ABILITY FOR AN INDIVIDUAL
TO EXPRESS HIM- OR HERSELF,
IS THE NATURAL RESULT OF
A HUMAN BEING EXPERIENCING LIFE?
LIFE GOES IN, ART COMES OUT.
EXPERIENCE ENTERS,
SELF-EXPRESSION EMERGES...
TO THE POINT IN WHICH ART
IS NO LONGER LIMITED
TO THE ARTIFACTS
YOU HANG ON THE WALL
OR THE PAINTINGS IN THE HALL.
ART ISN'T JUST THE DANCING
CEREMONIES OF ANCESTORS,
BUT ALSO THE REASON FOR DANCING
IN THE FIRST PLACE.
AND DOWN THROUGH THE AGES,
THE ACCEPTANCE OF
AN ARTISTIC APPROACH TO LIFE
HAS ALWAYS STRUCK
THE BELL OF TRUTH
IN THE FACE OF REPRESSIVE
PERIODS IN SOCIETY.
-IF YOU GUYS WOULD LIKE TO RING
THE BELL AND ROLL IN THE DUST...
-[ CHUCKLES ]
-YEAH!
[ BELL RINGS ]
-WHOO! NICE JOB.
-I AM NO LONGER...
-WORD.
-YUP.
[ BELL RINGS ]
-WHOO!
-NICE. NICELY DONE.
GOOD JOB.
[ BELL DINGS ]
-WHOO!
-ALL RIGHT!
HAVE A GREAT BURN!
WELCOME HOME!
-I WENT TO BURNING MAN TO SEE
WHAT ALL THE HYPE WAS ABOUT.
I ALSO WENT TO FILM THIS SHOW.
WHAT I ENDED UP GETTING
OUT OF THIS ROAD TRIP
ALL ACROSS AMERICA
WAS INSPIRATION.
ARTISTS BECOME MAGICIANS
WHEN IN LARGE GATHERINGS.
I BEGAN TO SEE MAGIC
AS A FORM OF REALITY
MUCH HIGHER
THAN THE ONE I USED TO.
[ DRUMS POUNDING ]
[ POUNDING CONTINUES ]
BEING A MUSICIAN
WAS MY FIRST REAL LOVE,
AND I HAVE BEEN THROUGH HELL
AND BACK IN ITS RELATIONSHIP.
EVERY LAYER I WOULD PENETRATE
INTO THE MYSTERY OF MUSIC
WOULD SEND ME DEEPER
INTO AN UNDERSTANDING OF MYSELF.
WHAT IS IT
IN HUMAN CONSCIOUSNESS
THAT CAN SAY A BLUES PROGRESSION
ON THE PIANO
MAKES MELODIC SENSE,
WHEREAS A MADMAN HITTING
THE KEYS IS SENSELESS?
THERE HAS TO BE SOME KIND
OF ORDER THAT WE TAP INTO,
SOME ORGANIZED FORCE
THAT WE EMBODY
WHICH ALLOWS US
TO UNDERSTAND MUSIC
AND DISTINGUISH IT FROM NOISE.
I HAVE ALWAYS ASKED
THAT QUESTION,
AND HAVE YET TO ANSWER IT.
YET EVEN THOUGH I AM NO CLOSER
TO THE ANSWER
AFTER 15 YEARS IN MUSIC,
THE SIMPLE FACT
THAT I ASKED THE QUESTION
SEEMS TO HAVE
PROPELLED ME DEEPER
INTO AN UNDERSTANDING OF MUSIC
AND A RECOGNITION OF MYSELF.
-SO, AS WE BEGIN
TO UNDERSTAND WHO WE ARE,
THE SAME OCCURS COLLECTIVELY,
AND WE RECOGNIZE OURSELVES
IN EACH OTHER.
AND SO WHAT ELSE CAN COME
OF THAT
OTHER THAN SPONTANEOUS
CO-CREATION?
-I MET MICHAEL TWO YEARS AGO
AT A TALK I GAVE IN TORONTO.
HE SHOOK MY HAND AND TOLD ME
WHAT A GREAT TALK I GAVE.
AND THEN HE PROCEEDED TO ASK ME
FOR A RIDE HOME.
THIS WAS SO UNEXPECTED
AND OUT OF THE ORDINARY
THAT I JUMPED
AT THE OPPORTUNITY.
NOT MANY PEOPLE
ARE SO CONFIDENT AND BOLD
TO TREAT EVERYONE EQUALLY.
I LIKED HIM IMMEDIATELY.
TWO YEARS LATER, AMONG 70,000
PEOPLE FROM AROUND THE WORLD,
MICHAEL APPROACHES ME,
TELLING ME I LOOK FAMILIAR.
ONE COULD TRY TO CALCULATE
THE UNLIKELY ODDS
THAT THE SINGLE TENT
NEXT TO OURS WAS MICHAEL,
THE ODDS THAT WE WOULD CAMP
NEXT TO ONE ANOTHER,
THE ODDS THAT WE WOULD EVEN
RECOGNIZE EACH OTHER,
AND THE ODDS THAT HE WOULD BE
THE PERFECT PERSON TO INTERVIEW.
-CAN I GET A QUICK SOUND CHECK
FROM YOU?
-FOR SURE, BROTHER.
WHAT IS THERE TO BE SAID?
IN THIS MOMENT,
WE ARE INSIDE OF A HOLOGRAM.
-THIS WAS MY INTRODUCTION TO
A WEEK FULL OF SYNCHRONICITIES,
AND A PLACE PREGNANT WITH
WHAT COULD ONLY BE DESCRIBED
AS MAGIC
BY MY SIMPLE UNDERSTANDING.
SO I ASKED HIM,
"WHAT IS THIS PLACE?
WHAT'S HAPPENING HERE?"
-ESSENTIALLY,
WHAT WE'RE DEALING WITH HERE
IS THE RECOGNITION
OF HUMANITY'S ENLIGHTENMENT.
THE REASON WHY I'M HERE
IS TO PROVE THAT HUMANITY
IS ENLIGHTENED ENOUGH.
THERE IS AN ELEPHANT
IN HUMANITY'S ROOM RIGHT NOW,
AND WE ARE ABOUT TO UNVEIL IT
TOGETHER.
-THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM,
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN,
IS A TRUTH SO BIG, SO CLOSE,
AND SO OBVIOUS
THAT MOST OF US CANNOT SEE IT
BECAUSE IT'S ACTUALLY
TOO SIMPLE,
AND WE HAVE PLACED LIMITATIONS
TO WHAT WE RECOGNIZE AS REAL
BECAUSE WE EXPECT ONLY
COMPLEXITY OUT OF LIFE.
-THIS IS A CULMINATION OF PEOPLE
WHO HAVE THE VISION
TO SEE THE ELEPHANT
STANDING INSIDE OF OUR ROOM.
SO, WHEN A VISION COMES
THAT, ESSENTIALLY,
TRANSCENDS THE LIMITATIONS
THAT WE HAVE IMPOSED
ON OURSELVES,
IT'S ONLY A MATTER
OF RECOGNIZING THE SIMPLICITY
THAT LIES WITHIN THE DAO
OF SOCIAL CHANGE.
IN OTHER WORDS,
THE LEAST AMOUNT OF EFFORT
WITH THE GREATEST AMOUNT
OF POWER.
WE CAN AGREE ON SO MUCH.
THE QUESTION IS,
WHAT IS THE FUNDAMENTALS
THAT WE NEED TO AGREE ON
TO TRANSCEND
THE CURRENT PARADIGM?
THE PEOPLE HERE
HAVE THE COHERENCE
TO RECEIVE THE MESSAGE
BECAUSE THE MESSAGE IS SO SIMPLE
THAT IT REQUIRES US TO BELIEVE
THAT THE GREATEST SOLUTIONS
TO OUR GREATEST QUESTIONS
ARE STARING AT US IN THE FACE.
-WHAT MICHAEL WAS TALKING ABOUT
WAS QUITE SIMPLE,
BUT IT WAS FAR
FROM A SMALL IDEA.
THE ONLY THING
HE WOULD CONCERN HIMSELF WITH
WAS POINTING OUT THE ELEPHANT.
AND I BARELY HEARD HIM
SPEAK ABOUT SPECIFICS.
HE KNEW THAT SPECIFICS
ARE PART OF THE EFFECT,
AND HE SIMPLY AIMS
TO PRODUCE THE CAUSE
THAT ALLOWS FOR THE SPECIFICS
TO BE SEEN.
IT BECAME CLEAR
THAT WHAT HE WAS SPEAKING ABOUT
WAS NOT SOMETHING LIMITED
TO WHAT WE WERE SEEING
AT BURNING MAN,
BUT RATHER BURNING MAN
AS A SYMPTOM
OF A SPONTANEOUS GLOBAL SHIFT
IN ATTENTION.
WHEREAS 50 YEARS AGO,
THE THOUGHT
OF WORLD TRANSFORMATION
WAS ONLY CONCEIVABLE
THROUGH WARS,
WORLD LEADERS, AND CATACLYSMS.
AND THEN, 10 YEARS LATER,
THE CONFLICT BETWEEN
THE UNITED STATES
AND NORTH VIETNAM
BECAME THE CATALYST
FOR PEOPLE TO HOLD
LARGE GATHERINGS
OF RADICAL SELF-EXPRESSION.
THIS SAME PHENOMENA EMERGED
IN ANCIENT GREECE,
WHICH WAS CALLED
THE DIONYSIAN MYSTERIES.
PEOPLE FLED TO REMOTE LOCATIONS
AND EXPLORED FREE LOVE,
SEXUALITY WITHOUT GUILT,
MIND-ALTERING SUBSTANCES,
SINGING, DANCING, AND THE ARTS.
IN THOSE MOMENTS
WHERE MORALS ARE STRETCHED,
CIVIL EXPECTATIONS
ARE ABANDONED,
AND ALL LIMITS TO THE MIND
ARE OBLITERATED,
IT IS POSSIBLE TO ACKNOWLEDGE
HOW NARROW OUR APPROACH
TO REALITY TRULY IS.
HOWEVER, PSYCHEDELICS
AND OPPRESSIVE GOVERNMENTS
ARE ONLY CATALYSTS.
NONE OF THEM ARE THE CAUSE
OF LARGE-SCALE TRANSFORMATION.
THE CAUSE IS THE FLOW OF LIFE,
THAT EVER-CHANGING AND RAPIDLY
MOVING SOURCE OF "IT"...
THAT UNNAMEABLE INTUITION
THAT GUIDES YOUR ATTENTION
TOWARDS THE THING
THAT INSPIRES YOU
RATHER THAN THE ONE
THAT BORES YOU.
WE DON'T LISTEN TO IT OFTEN
BECAUSE WE HAVE TOO MANY AGENDAS
FIXED INTO OUR DAY.
NO ROOM FOR EXPLORATION.
WE LEAVE NO TIME
FOR EXPERIMENTATION.
NO MORE PLAY.
WE DISMISS IT
BECAUSE THE ROUTINE WE'RE IN.
SOMETHING LIKE, "NO,
I CAN'T TAKE THIS PHONE CALL.
"IT'S 9:00, AND THAT'S WHEN
I BRUSH MY TEETH, GO TO BED,
WAKE UP, AND DO THE EXACT SAME
THING I DO EVERY DAY."
DRAMATIC EXAMPLE,
BUT I KNOW YOU'RE FAMILIAR.
THIS FLOW OF LIFE, IT'S A RIVER.
THE FLOW IS ALWAYS CHANGING,
ALWAYS MOVING,
ALWAYS CARRYING THE STORY
FORWARD.
IT'S HARD TO PUT INTO WORDS
EXACTLY
BECAUSE THE RIVER IS NOT
SOMETHING YOU CAN MEASURE,
NOT SOMETHING YOU CAN TOUCH.
IT'S NOT TANGIBLE.
THINGS ARE ALWAYS HAPPENING
ON THIS PLANET.
THE ONLY THING YOU CAN RELY ON
IS THAT ALL THINGS WILL CHANGE.
THE RIVERBED MAY CHANGE,
BUT THE WATER WILL NEVER BE
THE SAME AGAIN.
THE SPONTANEOUS EMERGENCE
OF PEOPLE EVERYWHERE,
SINGING, DANCING,
PRODUCING REVOLUTIONARY ART,
EXPLORING THE BOUNDARIES
OF LOVE, SEX, AND RELATIONSHIPS,
AND JUST CELEBRATING BEING ALIVE
IS ONLY AS PREDICTABLE
AS THE TIDES OF THE OCEAN.
NONE OF THE WATER IS THE SAME,
AND EACH WAVE IS AS UNIQUE
AS A FINGERPRINT.
BUT THE TIDE IS PART
OF SOMETHING MUCH BIGGER.
THERE'S AN OVERLYING THING
THAT GOES ON HERE AT BURNING MAN
WHICH EVERYBODY SEES.
IT'S ALL THE LIGHTS,
IT'S ALL THE CHAOS,
ALL THE MUSIC,
EVERYTHING THAT'S GOING ON.
THE THING THAT I DISCOVERED --
AND IT TOOK ME TWO, THREE DAYS
TO DISCOVER HERE --
IS THE UNDERLYING TONE OF IT,
WHICH IS SYNCHRONICITY.
THINGS JUST SEEM
TO MAGICALLY HAPPEN HERE.
IT'S AS IF MAGIC IS BRED HERE.
EVERYWHERE YOU GO, PEOPLE ARE
PUTTING ON THEIR FAVORITE MUSIC,
SETTING UP
THEIR FAVORITE ENVIRONMENT,
AND INVITING PEOPLE IN, SAYING,
"COME AND ENJOY YOURSELVES HERE.
"LET ME SHOW YOU
HOW I ENJOY MYSELF,"
AND, "I'LL CREATE
THAT WORLD FOR YOU."
AND THEN YOU STEP ONE CAMP DOWN
AND IT'S A COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT THING.
AND THEY'RE LIKE,
"HERE, COME IN AND JOIN.
"FOOD, FREE. DRINKS, FREE.
"JUST ENJOY THIS SPACE
THAT WE SET UP FOR YOU."
THIS IS A FESTIVAL
WHERE THE ORGANIZERS
SET UP SOMETHING
WHERE 70,000 PEOPLE COME,
AND INSTEAD OF SAYING,
"HERE, WATCH ALL THE BANDS
THAT WE SET UP FOR YOU,
WATCH ALL THE THINGS
THAT WE SET UP FOR YOU,"
THEY SET THIS UP AND SAY,
"YOU GUYS DO WHAT YOU WANT TO
DO, AND WE'RE GONNA WATCH."
I THINK THAT'S THE MOST
BRILLIANT THING IN THE WORLD.
BECAUSE, YEAH, 70,000 PEOPLE
WANT TO COME OUT HERE
AND BE THEMSELVES,
NOT JUST NECESSARILY BE WITNESS
TO SOMETHING
THAT'S SEPARATE FROM THEM.
EVERYBODY IS ABOUT A GIFT
MENTALITY, NOT A MENTALITY
OF "WHAT AM I GONNA GET
OUT OF DOING THIS FOR YOU?"
TYPE OF DEAL.
EVERYBODY HERE,
THEY WANT TO SHARE
HOW GOOD THEY FEEL
ON A DAILY BASIS,
AND HOW GOOD YOU CAN FEEL
WHEN YOU JUST REALLY LET GO
AND BE YOURSELF.
THIS IS A SHOW ABOUT ART
AND ITS UNIQUE ABILITY
TO INSPIRE THE WORLD
AWAY FROM COMPLACENCY,
OUT OF APATHY,
AND INTO A CONTINUAL FLOW
OF NEW EXPERIENCES.
THERE'S NOT MUCH
SCIENTIFIC EXPLANATION
FOR WHAT INSPIRATION IS
OR WHAT IT IS CAPABLE OF,
BECAUSE IT SEEMS TO BE CAPABLE
OF ANYTHING,
A FUEL THAT HAS NO LIMIT
TO WHAT IT CAN PRODUCE,
AND THAT ALWAYS TENDS
TO UNITE PEOPLE
AND LEAD TOWARDS THE EVOLUTION
OF IDEAS
THAT SHAPE THE WORLD
AND SHAPE THE FUTURE.
-THE PURPOSE
OF AN EVOLUTIONARY LEADER
IS TO MAKE EVOLUTION
IRRESISTIBLE, EFFORTLESS,
OBVIOUS, IRREFUTABLE,
AND THEREFORE INEVITABLE.
-PEOPLE ONLY DO
WHAT THEY BELIEVE IN.
IT IS ENTIRELY POSSIBLE
FOR 7 BILLION PEOPLE TO MAKE
THE SAME DECISION AT ONCE.
HOW LIKELY THAT SCENARIO IS
DEPENDS ON WHAT WE BELIEVE
AND HOW MUCH WE ACCEPT OR RESIST
WHAT WE BELIEVE IN.
PRIOR TO 1954,
PEOPLE OVERWHELMINGLY AGREED
THAT THE HUMAN BODY
WAS NOT CAPABLE
OF RUNNING A 4-MINUTE MILE.
"OUR BONE STRUCTURE IS
NOT BUILT FOR IT," THEY SAID.
"OUR LUNGS CANNOT HANDLE IT,"
THEY CLAIMED.
"OUR HEART WOULD NOT ALLOW IT."
HOWEVER, ON MAY 6th
OF THAT YEAR,
ROGER BANNISTER RAN A MILE
IN .6 SECONDS UNDER 4 MINUTES
AND SURVIVED JUST FINE.
THAT SIMPLE SHIFT IN WHAT
PEOPLE BELIEVED TO BE REAL
OPENED THE FLOOD GATES THAT
TRIED TO HOLD THE RIVER BACK.
-...BETWEEN JOHN LANDY
OF AUSTRALIA, NOW LEADING,
AND ROGER BANNISTER OF ENGLAND,
BOTH OF WHOM HAVE PREVIOUSLY
BROKEN 4 MINUTES.
-JOHN LANDY'S BEST ATTEMPT
PRIOR TO 1954
WAS A 4:02 MILE.
HE MADE A STATEMENT
THAT THE 4-MINUTE MILE
WAS A BRICK WALL
THAT CANNOT BE PENETRATED.
HE CLAIMED HE WOULD NEVER
ATTEMPT TO BEAT IT AGAIN.
BUT ONLY 56 DAYS AFTER BANNISTER
BROKE THROUGH THAT WALL,
LANDY WAS INSPIRED TO TRY AGAIN.
HIS VERY NEXT ATTEMPT
BROKE BANNISTER'S RECORD
BY 1.5 SECONDS.
THE FOLLOWING YEAR, 37 RUNNERS
BROKE THE 4-MINUTE MILE.
THE YEAR AFTER THAT, 300 RUNNERS
BROKE THROUGH THAT WALL.
THE WALL WAS NOT MADE OF BRICK,
AS LANDY SAID.
IT WAS MADE OF BELIEF.
NOTHING STOPS THE RIVER
FROM FLOWING.
WE MAY BUILD A DAM TO BLOCK IT,
AND THAT WALL
WILL TAKE LOTS OF ENERGY,
LOTS OF EFFORT TO MAINTAIN,
AND THAT STILL DOESN'T
MAKE IT SECURE.
AND WHEN ALL OF THAT ENERGY
TO KEEP THE WATER STILL,
TO KEEP IT PREDICTABLE,
IS SPENT AND GONE,
THE RIVER WILL WIN
AND WASH AWAY EVERYTHING
THAT ONCE TRIED TO IGNORE
THE INEVITABILITY OF CHANGE.
THAT'S THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM.
AND ALL THE KING'S HORSES
AND ALL THE KING'S MEN
COULDN'T PUT THE OLD STORY
BACK TOGETHER AGAIN
BECAUSE NOBODY BELIEVED IT.
NO KING, NO LEADER,
AND NO MILITARY FORCE
CAN PREVENT THE TIDES
FROM ROLLING IN.
CHANGE IS HAPPENING.
THE ONLY WAY
TO ALLEVIATE THE FEAR,
TO CALM THE NERVES,
AND TO AVOID UNNECESSARY PAIN
IS TO TAKE A DEEP BREATH,
COUNT DOWN FROM THREE TO ONE,
AND LET GO.
THREE...TWO...
AH, I FORGOT
ABOUT THE COMMERCIAL BREAK.
LIFE'S LITTLE INTERRUPTIONS
KEEPING US ON OUR TOES.
INTERRUPTIONS ARE GREAT,
ACTUALLY.
THEY SHOW US HOW MUCH FOCUS
WE GIVE
TO THE ESOTERIC AGENDAS
IN OUR MIND,
AND HOW LITTLE WE ARE PAYING
ATTENTION TO THE MOMENT.
TAKE, FOR INSTANCE, THIS JOKE.
LET'S SEE IF YOU CAN FIGURE OUT
THE PUNCH LINE BEFORE I SAY IT.
KNOCK, KNOCK.
WHO'S THERE?
INTERRUPTION MAN.
INTERRUPTION --
-ACTION.
-LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, WELCOME.
WE'RE HERE AT BURNING MAN 2013,
AND THE TOPIC OF THE DAY IS ART
AND HOW ART INSPIRES
CULTURE ALONG.
NOW, WE HAVE LEGISLATION,
WE HAVE PICKET SIGNS, PETITIONS.
WE HAVE A LOT OF THINGS
THAT TRY TO INFLUENCE
THROUGH MEANS
OF COERCION AND FEAR
OR MANIPULATION IN SOME MANNER
TO BRING ABOUT LIFE CHANGES,
TO BRING ABOUT WORLD CHANGES.
HOWEVER, ART IS THE ONE THING
THAT INSPIRES CULTURE ALONG,
AND IT HAPPENS
WITHOUT YOU EVER HAVING TO ASK
FOR CHANGE TO HAPPEN.
ALL YOU HAVE TO DO
IS ASK A QUESTION
BECAUSE ART IS A QUESTION MARK.
IT DOESN'T ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS,
IT PROVOKES THEM.
-IN THIS MOMENT,
WE ARE INSIDE OF A HOLOGRAM.
SO, WHEN YOU RECOGNIZE
THAT YOU ARE IN THE CENTER
OF YOUR UNIVERSE,
WHAT IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
QUESTION TO ASK?
-OVER THE COURSE OF SEVEN DAYS
AND IN THE PRESENCE
OF 70,000 ARTISTS,
I DISCOVERED A NEW DIET --
A DAILY DOSE OF QUESTION MARKS.
I RECOGNIZED THE PATTERN.
EVERY TIME THE MOMENT
SEEMS PREDICTABLE,
NO MATTER WHAT THE MOMENT
MIGHT BE,
NO MATTER HOW FAMILIAR
IT MIGHT SEEM,
THERE IS ALWAYS
SOMETHING NEW ABOUT IT.
AND EVERY TIME
I CHOSE TO APPROACH
SEEMINGLY PREDICTABLE MOMENTS
WITH COMPLETELY OPEN EYES
TO SEE THE NEW,
AND OPEN MIND TO CLEAR THE OLD,
AND THEN OPEN HEART TO EMBRACE
THE SHIFT BETWEEN THE TWO,
A KEY WAS PRESENTED TO ME.
THOSE KEYS UNLOCKED THE DOORS
THAT SEPARATED ME
FROM THE RIVER,
AND THOSE DOORS WERE MADE UP
STRICTLY
FROM ALL THE QUESTIONS
THAT I THOUGHT I HAD ANSWERS TO.
WHO AM I?
WHY AM I HERE?
WHAT IS MY PURPOSE HERE?
-THAT QUESTION IN ITSELF
IS THE ANSWER.
QUESTIONS AS ANSWERS
ARE DIVINE UNION.
QUESTIONS -- WHO AM I? --
CREATE THE HUMBLING OF THE EGO
AND THE ALLOWANCE OF INFINITY
TO BE ANSWERED.
-I HAD NEVER BEEN EXPOSED
TO SO MANY PEOPLE AT ONCE
WHO CHOOSE TO BELIEVE
IN ONLY WHAT INSPIRES THEM,
NOT JUST PERIODICALLY,
BUT PERPETUALLY.
JUST BEING IN THE SUSTAINED
PRESENCE OF ORDINARY PEOPLE
WHO ABSOLUTELY KNOW
THAT THEY ARE CAPABLE OF MAGIC
INSPIRED ME TO TRY IT OUT.
THE EXPECTATIONS
I HELD MYSELF TO
WOULD LOCK ME INTO A FRAMEWORK
LIKE AN OLD COMPUTER PROGRAM
IN DESPERATE NEED
FOR AN UPGRADE.
ALL UPGRADES, WHETHER TECHNICAL,
PSYCHOLOGICAL, OR BEYOND,
HAVE TO BE DOWNLOADED
FROM SOMEWHERE.
-WHAT A DOWNLOAD IS,
IS THE RECOGNITION
OF WHERE THOUGHTS AND IDEAS
COME FROM IN ESSENCE.
WE ARE SHARING
A COLLECTIVE MIND,
THE COLLECTIVE CONSCIOUSNESS,
AND GOD ANSWERS US
THROUGH OUR IDEAS.
SO ANY TIME WE HAVE AN IDEA,
WE ARE STANDING ON THE SHOULDERS
OF GIANTS
WHO HAVE COME BEFORE US
TO BRING US INTO THE PERSPECTIVE
THAT LEVERAGES
WHAT THEY CAME TO UNDERSTAND.
AND NOW WE'RE INTEGRATING IT
WITH WHAT THEY HAD NOT FATHOMED
IS AVAILABLE AS A RESOURCE TO US
IN TERMS
OF INTERNET TECHNOLOGIES,
IN TERMS OF COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGIES,
THE OPEN-SOURCE PARADIGM.
SO, NOW WE HAVE THAT
TO LEVERAGE.
AND WE HAVE THESE TOOLS
FOR SPONTANEOUS COLLABORATION
THAT HAVE NEVER BEEN AVAILABLE.
THE NEW STANDARD
FOR SOCIAL CHANGE
IS SPONTANEOUS PLANETARY
METAMORPHOSIS.
AND THAT IS THE EFFORTLESSNESS
AND IRREFUTABILITY,
IN TERMS OF CHRONOLOGY,
HOW FAST THINGS CAN OCCUR.
WE'RE NO LONGER ASKING
OURSELVES, "HOW?"
WE'RE ASKING OURSELVES,
"HOW LONG?"
WHICH SIMPLY ALLOWS
FOR A CHOICE POINT
FOR ALL OF HUMANITY TO SAY,
"DO I LIKE THIS IDEA?
IF I DO, HOW DO I SUPPORT IT?"
-HOW DO I SUPPORT IT?
HOW DO I SUPPORT AN IDEA
THAT FEELS RIGHT
AND IS AN OBVIOUS WAY
OUT OF THE MUD AND THE MIRE?
WELL, HOW DO YOU LET THE RIVER
CARRY YOU?
YOU SIMPLY LET GO OF THE ROCKS.
ALL OF THE ROCKS
THAT SYMBOLIZE THE RIGID MIND,
THE FIRM BELIEFS
THAT LIMIT OUR FREEDOM.
IT WAS A SCARY THING TO DO,
FOR SURE,
LETTING GO OF ALL THOSE ANSWERS
I WORKED SO HARD TO ARRIVE AT.
AND THE RIVER PROPELS ME DEEPER
INTO A FORCE OF ART
THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE
FROM MAGIC
BECAUSE IT IS THE RESULT
OF A REALITY
THAT I WAS NOT CAPABLE
OF EXPERIENCING
UNTIL I LET GO OF THE ROCKS.
ART EXPANDS THE LIMITATIONS
OF THE MIND.
IT LOOSENS OUR GRIP
ON THE BELIEFS
THAT CHAIN US TO THE PAST.
IT GIVES US A GLIMPSE OF LIFE
BEYOND OUR EXPECTATIONS.
ART IS THE THEME.
AND WE ARE HERE EXPLORING
HOW 60,000 TO 70,000 PEOPLE
COME TOGETHER IN A COMMUNITY
TO SIMPLY DO ONE THING --
BE THEMSELVES,
AND BE THEMSELVES A LOT.
AND THAT IS ONE THING
YOU WILL NOT FIND
MANY OTHER PLACES IN THE WORLD.
PEOPLE RUN TO SPIRITUAL
COMMUNITIES
OR DIFFERENT TYPES
OF COMMUNITIES FOR SALVATION.
"FIX ME, I'M BROKEN.
PLEASE, DO SOMETHING FOR ME.
GIVE ME, DELIVER ME FROM."
HOWEVER, WHEN YOU SEE
A TRUE ARTISTIC COMMUNITY,
ART COMMUNITIES
ARE THE ONES THAT SAY,
"NO. YOU ARE SAVED.
BE YOURSELF."
IMAGINE A MIDLIFE CRISIS,
WHERE A MAN BELIEVES
IN ONE THING HIS ENTIRE LIFE,
AND IN AN INSTANT,
THAT BELIEF IS SHATTERED.
THAT KIND OF CHANGE
IS BEYOND THE COMPREHENSION
OF THE ORIGINAL BELIEF.
THEREFORE, THE ROOTS OF ART
HAD TO GROW PAST THE BOUNDARIES
OF THE ROCK TO REACH THE WATER.
THE SHEER MAGNITUDE OF ONE
SINGLE TRANSFORMATION LIKE THIS
IS ALMOST TOO MUCH FOR SOMEONE
TO HANDLE ALL AT ONCE.
NOW IMAGINE THAT KIND OF CHANGE
HAPPENING EVERY SECOND
OF YOUR LIFE.
FURTHERMORE, IMAGINE THAT YOU
NOT ONLY ALLOW THESE CHANGES,
BUT EVERY TIME YOU EMBRACE THEM
WITH AN OPEN HEART,
A SENSE OF INSPIRATION EMERGES,
AND YOUR CAPACITY
FOR MAGIC EXPANDS.
BUT MAYBE MAGIC DOESN'T EXIST.
MAYBE THE SCIENTISTS WERE WRONG,
AND IT WAS ACTUALLY A 3-MINUTE
MILE THAT WAS IMPOSSIBLE.
MAYBE THIS IS ALL
A BIG MISUNDERSTANDING,
AND EVERYONE AT BURNING MAN,
AND ALL THE ARTISTS
AROUND THE WORLD, ARE MISTAKEN,
AND THE RIVER
IS JUST A METAPHOR,
A FANCY IDEA, NOTHING ELSE.
MAYBE.
BUT LET'S TRY SOMETHING
REVOLUTIONARY
AND ASSUME THAT WE DON'T KNOW.
LET'S SEE IF THE RIVER IS REAL.
ON THE COUNT OF THREE,
LET'S ALL LET GO.
THREE...
TWO...
...ONE.
DID YOU CATCH THE PUNCH LINE?